Homework 02
===========

**Due Date: Tuesday, January 27 by 11:00am CST**

As Good as Git Gets
-------------------

Your task for the second homework is to create a new Git repository and populate
it with several files / folders. This Git repository must be pushed to GitHub,
and it will be used for the rest of the semester to turn in your homeworks.

Here are the requirements for the Git repository:

* Must contain a top level ``README.md`` with a simple description of what the
  repository contains
* Must contain a directory called ``homework02``
* Must contain four different Python scripts, each solving one
  Exercise at the end of the
  `Python Refresher guide <https://mbs-337-sp26.readthedocs.io/en/latest/unit01/python_refresher.html#exercises>`_
* The directory ``homework02`` must also contain a ``README.md`` file with a
  description of the Python scripts (contents may vary between students)
* **Must contain a minimum of four commits - use git log to see commits**
* Must be pushed to GitHub, and be either public or private (if private, make
  sure to add kbeavers@tacc.utexas.edu, wallen@tacc.utexas.edu, and
  eferlanti@tacc.utexas.edu as collaborators on the repo)

A sample Git repository may contain the following files after completing
homework 02:

.. code-block:: text

   my-mbs337-repo/
   ├── homework02/
   │   ├── exercise1.py 
   │   ├── exercise2.py
   │   ├── exercise3.py
   │   ├── exercise4.py
   │   └── README.md          # specifically describes the contents of the homework02 directory
   └── README.md              # generally describes the whole repo

What to Turn In
---------------

Send an email to kbeavers@tacc.utexas.edu, wallen@tacc.utexas.edu, and
eferlanti@tacc.utexas.edu with the link to your GitHub repository and include 
"Homework 02" in the subject line. We will clone all of your repos at the due date / time for evaluation.

Note on Using AI
----------------

The use of AI to complete this assignment is not recommended, but it is permitted
with the following restrictions:

The use of LLMs (like ChatGPT, Copilot, etc) or any other AI must be rigorously
cited. Any code blocks or text that are generated by an AI model should be
clearly marked as such with in-code comments describing what was generated, how
it was generated, and why you chose to use AI in that instance. The homework
README must also contain a section that summarizes where AI was used in the assignment.


Additional Resources
--------------------

* `Python Refresher guide <https://mbs-337-sp26.readthedocs.io/en/latest/unit01/python_refresher.html>`_
* Please find us in the class Slack channel if you have any questions!
